+++
title = "Updates: What I've Been Up To"
date = 2025-10-06T07:23:26+06:00
draft = true
+++
## TL; DR
I've been studying general relativity, topology, differential geometry, and some analysis. Have put my philosophy studies on hold for the time being.

## A Dream Came True - Background
When I started self-studying theoretical physics about 10 years back, my goal was to achieve a working understanding of the field *at least* upto general relativity, and maybe QFT as well. I relied on my computer for studying, and due to my then PC's going out-of-whack and my HSC exams followed by admission tests, I had to put the studies on hold after having reached upto classical electromagnetism. After a gap of about a year and a half or two, I picked up where I left off and made some more progress, studying classical, Lorentz-invariant field theories. Then COVID struck, got a free access of Coursera from Dhaka University, and got really engaged in learning more of CS especially ML and AI. And since then I haven't really been able to be back to physics anymore given my MBBS finals, followed by a one-year internship, followed by preparing for BCS and FCPS exams, and so on. After Allah blessed me with passing both, I've gone back to "finish off" the quest that I started in 2014. I've gotta say though, from a study of GR in the past few months, I've started to enjoy differential geometry even more than the physics, I think.

## What I've Been Following
I really don't like the traditional approach most books and courses take in teaching maths and physics, since they don't provide you with enough motivation for coming up with different concepts and definitions and axioms and so on. So I tend to wander a lot between various resources for the same topic, trying to see the subject from different angles. But I've kept my main book consistent so far since I particularly enjoy their way of exposition - it's called _General Relativity for the Gifted Amateur_ by Lancaster and Blundell (henceforth referred to as _Gifted_). It's an excellent first introduction to the theory along with the requisite maths and I've read about half of the book so far. I've used various other resources to supplement my understanding, particularly for differential geometry. I'll write down about this and the other resources I've used so far with what I found to be helpful from them below.
1. _Gifted_: My go-to intro for GR. It introduces everything very clearly with plenty of accompanying diagrams, often hand-drawn, that help to form a clear mental image of what's being dealt with. 
1. Penrose's _Road to Reality_: It's a big, fat ($\approx 1200$ pages), elegant book that covers most of what we understand about the fundamental laws of the universe (i.e. GR and QFT) along with all the maths needed to describe them (everything going from complex analysis to fibre bundles). Since Penrose was trained first as a mathematician, his exposition of the maths gave me many moments of fascinating conceptual clarity. One that I especially enjoyed was the elegant way he derives the Cauchy-Riemann equations, by arguing that a holomorphic function $f$ must satisfy $\partial f / \partial \bar z = 0$. His discussion on differential forms has also been conceptually very illuminating. And it's chock-full of hand-drawn illustrations to accompany each conceptual point.
2. Crowell's _General Relativity_: A less mathematically demanding intro to GR (also: _FREELY AVAILABLE!_) that has some beautiful geometrical insights. For example, _there must be a cosmic speed limit_ since light moving at an infinite speed allows us to compare path lengths along world lines with different endpoints, violating the principle of relativity which says inertial frames are all equivalent and no such comparisons are possible.
3. Needham's _Visual Differential Geometry and Forms_: A _beautiful_ book. Used it to supplement my understanding of differential geometry (which gained primarily from _Gifted_), especially what's called _classical_ differential geometry, i.e. Gauss' theory of differential geometry of curves and surfaces embedded in $\R^3$. Have been looking into the Act V for the past few days which discusses differential forms. I'll update the post when I'm done, in shaa Allah.
7. Zee's _Einstein Gravity in a Nutshell_: Professor Zee tends to be a bit chatty, but introduces GR at about the same level as _Gifted_. I liked, in particular, his way of 
4. Tong's _Lecture Notes on General Relativity_: Another marvellous free resource. Professor David Tong is one of my fav physics teachers, and the notes reflect the reason for that pretty well so far that I've read.  
